This is the OGM weekly call for Thursday, October 23rd, 2025.
Our topic today is, has progress stopped?
And I was just starting down that path when I realized I hadn't turned on the recording, so now it's on.
But there's some obvious questions like, hey, we're not flying any faster or traveling any faster than we did.
In the 1950s.
what's up with that? There are other cultural questions. I was pointing to Ted Joya, who has…
really interesting essays about popular culture and how the infinite scroll seems to be eating thoughtful culture, etc., etc., and I think we'll
we'll find other angles to put into the conversation.
As we go here. Uh, so let me go with Alex.
Oh, sorry, I had to speak up on this, because I think.
We're going to go down the intellectual route. And I do believe that one of the factors is… that with the way we have progressed our civilization has progressed.
There are so many big… interests that actually are beginning to work against.
progress. The exception is computing, IT. For some reason, that.
But has bucked the trend. But I would argue that if anything came out.
tomorrow, but… the best battery there ever was that would solve all the problems.
the oil industry and the governments, and everybody will say it was too much impact to the economy of the world, therefore.
will buy it out, and that would be the end of it.
So there's a… there's now an overweight… kind of hegemonic.
interests in the world economy. But I actually, in certain ways, suppressing progress, if the progress is going to be massive.
disruptive, etc. And I know I've discussed this with many other people, and they'll say, oh, you're a conspiracy theorist, Alex, or whatever.
But I actually think that's part of the cycle.
I just wanted to put that in before we go to the intellectual route, which is also a very good.
route to go.
Um, I think that, that, you know, vested interests in the economics of progress are somewhat intellectual. I mean, they're not emotional in the sense of it's not, you know, coming from some very different place.
It's just a piece of the analysis, I think. So I paraphrased what you just said badly, probably, in the chat.
vested interests will kill most progress, that people who have, uh, you know, whose golden goose will be killed,
We'll make sure that any novel thing that endangers their business will not thrive? Is that what you mean?
Yes, that's what I mean, yes. And they're big enough to do it now.
And we've…
they have enough influence.
And we've seen plenty of things like this. I'll point to a favorite old example, which is the great American streetcar Conspiracy.
In which, uh, American…
General Motors, uh,
Firestone, Philips 66, and Mac Truck wanted to sell bus, uh,
more buses in the U.S., so they bought up most of the light rail lines which existed and were thriving.
And then slowly turned down service, and then shut down the lines.
And because they realized that once you've pulled up the rails and burned the cars, nobody's gonna go install a brand new
Light rail line, and as a result, we have car culture, not, uh,
public transit culture, and we struggle.
you know, Portland has a… what I consider an extremely wimpy,
light rail system that kind of makes it around, and, you know, it's not good. And then you go to Berlin, and you drop in, or you go to any major international city.
And you drop in, and you're like, OMG.
Uh, they have layers and layers of public transit, which is running all the time really snappy, and is, uh, you know,
very serviceable, so…
Firestone.
I thought the tire companies were involved, too. Yeah. Oh, you did say that, okay.
Yeah, and they got found for antitrust, but it was too late because blah blah blah. I mean, you know, the government found against them.
the whole thing. Kill, please.
You're… you were muted, but now you're not. Good.
Sorry, does that… yeah, I had to hit some toggles.
Um, so I think there's a question behind your question, Jerry, of what is progress.
Um,
Yes. Which, uh, which Victoria asked in the chat.
Yeah, which I… but no, and I had asked in the chat above, and Pete thought I was asking the wrong question, but several of us are interested in going in that direction, number one. Number two,
Um, the example of transportation in European cities is… calls into question whether the lack of progress in the United States is about the lack of progress of humanity.
Uh, progress may be highly localized.
And, um, it seems to me there's progress in lots of areas. Do I have screen share?
I'll just show you something?
Yes, it's set by default for everybody to be able to screen share.
Okay, let me just see if I can pop this open real quickly here.
Because if we look at, you know, if we look at things like energy transition, renewable energy, progress of the price and performance of renewable energy over the past
20, 30 years has been striking.
And we are now… we now have more renewable energy being generated on the planet than coal-generated energy.
And et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So there's, you know, there's progress in some dimensions there. Let's see, desktop here…
For example, you know, stuff like that. So that would argue that there is progress, although, you know, climate degradation is proceeding apace, environmental degradation proceeding apace.
Um, personal in our lives, I'm looking at medical progress, and I have a wife who would not be alive.
Um, without certain kind of cancer research that's happened. I'm in remission from a disease that, when she was first diagnosed, we were told we'd kill her in 2 years.
And she's now 11 years in and in remission.
So, I gotta, I gotta count that as progress.
Yep. Um…
So, so, so back to my… so my starting question is, when you say, you know, is progress ended, it's like, what do you mean by progress?
Which is a great question to ask.
I will say that…
how our energy is generated happens behind the curtain.
And so we don't necessarily see it, and the electricity that shows up at the socket is the same electricity that showed up at the socket at 1950, so there's no
perceived difference to our daily lives, the way there would be if supersonic airplane travel had taken over. We'd be like, oh my gosh,
You can get to London in 2 hours instead of, you know, 9.
Although I now have an induction range.
So I have a better cooking experience and less toxic pollution in my house and less fire risk, with the same electricity. And the electricity comes from my roof.
with a backup battery that switches over in microseconds if there's a power outage.
So, yeah, it's the same electrons.
But the overall experience is certainly better for me.
And the electrons are having a much better time of it, so…
I hope so. I hope so.
That's good. Um…
Mike? Yeah, please.
So, point you're being, Jerry, that… so there's several layers of interpretation happening in this conversation.
And I'd like to open them up and have them be visible.
I… I… that sounds great, and if you would like to step back in and propose…
progress framework, some way we can kind of look at and separate out these things, that would be cool. I mean, I'm into that exploration, that sounds great.
I'm gonna hold off on that and ask you what you… because you raised the question, what do you mean by progress? Give us a…
you know, a framing or contextual definition of how that lives in you. Because there's… you clearly have a strong, you know, you have interpretations and strong feelings about this, but let us inside your brain case.
That's funny. Um, I…
Don't think I'm a proponent for the notion that progress has died. I am definitely not in that camp.
Okay.
I am, uh, I am provoking the conversation here intentionally.
With the notion that we all kind of broaden out what we mean by it,
Uh, what examples of it stand out for us, and so forth.
And I think the place I'll go to is the superficial end of progress, which is
the dramatic ways in which people's lives have been affected. So, our grandparents likely lived through electrification.
Um, and their parents probably lived through a hygiene revolution.
And so on and so forth. Things that were major. You know, when the outhouse goes away and you have running water and it's clean, and you get less sick,
And all that. Those are really pretty large things.
And, um, there may not be…
Large changes like that left? I doubt that, sincerely. It may be that AI takes us through the next large change like that, and we're living through it this very instant.
That's an interesting proposition.
But yeah, so Gil writes in the chat, so progress as transformation of daily life. I think that's one…
superficial way of looking at it, but when people ask, where is my flying car, that's kind of what they're asking. It's like, hey, I expected by now that I could
You know, or maybe I could hit a button on my phone like I do for Uber, and a hexacopter would land in my backyard and take me anywhere I want in the city by now.
Well, heck, where is it?
And maybe that's not it. And maybe…
Don't get me started on the word civilization, because if we go back to the dawn of everything and a bunch of other angles here,
you know, technological progress and economic progress tends to be
At the cost of a whole bunch of other things that we may value more, that progress might actually be
a relentment on.
pushing technology on us that gets us addicted, that this, that, that, that, the other, that progress might in fact be something entirely different. So I'm open to anybody who wants to wave that flag.
in this conversation, because I probably feel stronger about that.
than I do about where's my flying car? Because I don't particularly want
urban, uh, urban airscapes.
littered with, uh, drones and air taxis and all this other kind of stuff, because
A fender bender at your corner,
is something that the rest of the city can ignore.
a couple of, you know, quadcopters crashing into each other and dropping into a neighborhood is not something that's easy to ignore.
So, like that. Mr. Nelson.
Uh, I'm gonna be… provocative and obnoxious, and say.
Excellent.
rewrite this question. I mean, we have already been diverted 10 minutes by talking about what is progress.
And that's… I mean, it's just not useful. I mean, all of us have different definitions. I've got at least 5.
Um, I would… actually propose we narrow to something that we might actually be able to talk about for an hour and make some… progress on, and that is… Are there more barriers?
to technological development. I mean, when I hear the word progress, I can say, okay, well.
That's… are we having more… scientific and research discoveries.
Uh, and then the second part is, are we applying those discoveries in cool, exciting new technologies?
And then there's… are there economic barriers that actually prevent us from using those cool technologies?
like the Super Battery example. And then there's a whole other line of progress, which is… Are we building our societies in better ways? And I would say that.
Progress towards a better American democracy. is not gonna happen for the next 3 years.
And we can have a whole discussion about. societal progress and evolution of… of governance systems.
But I just… I mean, your question is so broad, wide open, we're gonna all talk past each other. Each of us will… make our contribution, and then the next person will say something different, and because.
We're all coming from a different place. of what progress we think is most important.
I mean, we could go straight to the… output, right? And say.
the improvement in the quality of daily life. that we have seen for the last 200 years.
is plateauing or ceasing. I mean, that would be a very provocative thing, and… I would argue against that if we took a global perspective.
I think here in the U.S, the quality of life is not doing very well, partly because we're… amusing ourselves to death, and we're all… Dealing with so many conflicting demands for our time, and…
And what I… and what, um… Dilbert used to call Confusopoly.
These companies are… throwing so many options at us, and they're… they're constantly trying to confuse.
what the product is that we're paying for, and how much we pay. I mean, we just don't have time to sort through the crap.
And they won't answer the phone when we call them.
So that's a whole other thing about customer service, and there's… I think… I think despite the new AI tools, these call centers are… doing a better job of diverting you away from your end goal than getting you there. That's a very niche.
example of progress. But, um, there's just… too many things that we could talk about.
with your question, so I would… I would propose a counter question, which is.
Are there more barriers. too technological.
improvement. than in the past. Um, and I would throw two… two things out. If you haven't seen them.
Corey Doctorow's new book, In Shitification. is directly on this question about why can't we have good things.
Why aren't technological breakthroughs leading to customer service breakthroughs and quality of life improvements?
And then the other one is… is… a deeper and actually more important book called Breakneck.
And the subtitle says it all. how China is engineering our future.
And the one-line summary that every book review has mentioned is.
China is a… society run by engineers.
who build things. America has evolved into a… lawyerly culture.
that obstructs things. And it's… it's becoming more true every day.
Long screed, I hope that's a helpful suggestion. Um, see where it goes.
Um…
Good. So, I… I…
And thanks for raising a very important issue. I just… I think… We need to…
I empathize with your feeling that the topic was too broad. I think our MO tends to be…
Um, I throw a fish on the table, and then we sort of take different stabs and swings at it, and see where it goes, and we end up in something that we generally like and sort of settle into.
And I'm unclear that everybody else on the call wants to talk about technological progress.
Um, which is kind of, kind of why I framed it really broadly.
And by the way, if any of you have followed the Peter Thiel and the Antichrist thread, which I followed last week,
Uh, to my sort of chagrin dismay and great interest.
It's crazy. He's… I think he's saying, and I believe Peter Thiel believes that anybody who throws a barrier in front of
you know, AGI and superintelligence from these new devices and other kinds of progress.
is the Antichrist, and should be dealt with accordingly, which is a little…
frightening. I will… I will post a link to that in my… in my brain. There's a bunch of great articles about that.
Uh, yeah, Countiesopoly now has a Wikipedia page, which is nice.
I'm in Victoria.
I was thinking something similar to Mike. But in another completely different dimension.
Because progress comes from what we have imagined as a future.
And the French writer Jules Bernet. the outside of 80 days traveling the world in Balloon, this kind of… He… for so… so, or… He gave us a framework to look forward.
So, who is imagining our futures? who are now playing this role?
of imagining possible outcomes for the future. Because everything I see nowadays, it's… AIi, AI?
out space colonies? immortality?
And maybe the metaverse or something like that? And all the narratives are very dark, like Black Mirror.
So, the people imagining our futures. are painting them really black.
And maybe it's not only because the governments, the… laws in the Americas, laws in Europe.
Because we also have very restrictive laws. Maybe it's also because we ourselves are… Fearing what we have done.
That was my reflection.
Thank you, thank you. Um, you're so right, so many of the visions that were being given are bleak.
And, uh, or, or whacked, like Zuckerberg's Metaverse.
flavors. It's interesting, you just reminded me that we had a call in 2021.
called Our Desirements for a Better Verse. I'll put a link to it in the chat.
where, uh, I think it came out of someone in this group talking about desirements. I think it was at Scott?
It was somebody who sort of coined desirements, which seemed like a lovely phrase.
And, um, we tried to talk about this notion of what… how would we imagine something better? So I actually bought the domain TheBetterverse.com.
I think? What is it?
There we go. Uh…
TheBetaverse.org, which I don't think I've put much on, but I will put
it into, uh, into the chat.
And that was a lovely conversation, because we were trying to say,
What is a better vision for our future? And I'm sad that Hank Kuna is not on this call. He's based in Amsterdam.
He is currently with his wife in Thailand, having a very nice time going around the country.
And some time off. But Hank has spent most of his career
helping, uh, ordinary citizens develop, and children, and sort of mixed generations and so forth.
helping them all develop visions of the future and articulate them and share them with each other, which I think is a…
an interesting notion, and its own little ball of complexity.
But, uh, thank you.
Um, thanks. Thanks, Ray. It's an interesting, provocative question. Um, Mike, I…
I hear you're…
uh… suggestion.
Um, and I actually don't find Jerry's…
Um, Jerry's provocation.
to be disruptive, or distributive, or something like that. For me, the point of it is actually to have a messy discussion about…
what is progress? Who wants what? You know, how would I define it? How would you define it? How would we define it?
Um… so… so let me talk about what I…
think about progress a little bit. Um, I would say that… that…
humanity, uh, humans, have
kind of ebbed and flowed with progress over the past 10,000, 20,000 years.
Um, uh, it's nice that I never have to worry about being fed, unless I
lose my income and… and then…
you know, aren't supported by my weird society that doesn't really want to help people, who…
are, uh, less fortunate, or something than the rest of us.
Um, and, you know, that's not true 5,000 years ago, it might have been something really, really difficult to do, making sure that I got enough calories and enough protein and enough water every day.
Um, but on the other hand, um, I live in a society where we're all very isolated from each other, um,
we have these very small communities, tight-knit communities. The nuclear family thing is…
is dumb. Um, you know, I should be living in a…
in a… you know, in a place where I'm surrounded by 100 people I really love, and get along well with, and then that group of us should be surrounded by a hundred communities, each about the same size.
Um, uh, all kind of living in harmony, et cetera, et cetera, right? Um, so…
you know, depending on… I… so I'm a little bit…
I'm a little bit surprised that we're talking about economic progress or technological progress, or things like that.
Um, uh, or societal progress. You know, I wouldn't judge that a million-person city is a great advance over
Um, a thousand-person village from a thousand years ago, you know? I mean, there's some awesome things about it.
you know, museums, or…
um… whatever. Uh, culture stuff.
Um, but there's a bunch of bad stuff, too, and…
And… and uh… on the flip side, um… I… another thing I'm surprised about is that we…
I think we narrowed down on human progress very quickly. For me, what I care about is things like equity and opportunity, uh, agency for all living beings, not just humans. Um, and minimizing pain and suffering, especially
Pain and suffering inflicted on one to another. So, we live in a world where we have these things called concentrated animal feeding operations.
Where I am aghast that humans can even live on the planet with themselves, with
subjugation and torture of other, you know, living beings.
For their pleasure and benefit, you know, and it's like…
What the heck are we doing? And this is something that, you know, is a modern
progress from 100 years ago or 200 years ago, or 1,000 years ago. And I… I can't even imagine, like, I'm… I'm embarrassed every time I think about it, you know?
Oh my god, we think we're having progress over the past couple hundred years, and this is where we have ended up.
And that's kind of one, you know, little thing. Um, you know, we have…
a kind of progress and a kind of regression, um, in the way that we govern ourselves. Um, you know, the…
It comes and goes, but right now, I think we're doing a really bad job of
of…
selecting, um, a leadership
organization for the United States. And, you know, is that progress where we are with the current administration? I don't think so.
Um… so…
Um, I guess in general, it's interesting. I love the question, you know.
Uh, is… has progress stopped? Um, uh, I… and… and kind of in answer, I think there's progress and regression in lots of different ways. Um, and… and I think…
I wish people… I wish humans paid more attention to non-humans, um…
And progress for them, as well.
Thanks.
Thank you very much.
Hey Scott, our topic today is…
has progress stopped?
And uh…
We're going around on that in different kinds of ways.
Are we going around, or are we raising hands?
We've been raising hands, and there's a gap in the hand raise just now, which is why I said hi to you.
I don't want to jump in.
Um, and uh… so we've been, uh…
putting a whole bunch of things, and part of it is, like, we're trying to adjust the lens and figure out, like, how big is the aperture of what we want to talk about, and what are we going to focus on, and so forth.
Yep.
Uh, and there's been a…
I have a perspective on it, which is why I jumped in. I was hoping this would be the subject.
Uh, that sounds great, and I would love… we would love to hear your perspective.
Excellent. So, a couple years ago. I did a deep dive into my family history.
And found out that we are actually. bicycle barons in the U.S, so to speak.
Huh, no way, from Dayton, or from where?
Ohio. Had to be Ohio.
Don't know why. Why Ohio?
From Shelby, Ohio. Um, it had to be Ohio. Um… Uh, my… I used to work in the retail industry in Ohio, and.
It was a 10-hour drive to. Well, I think it was 80% of the country.
Yeah, and also the Erie Canal, I think, helped with… yeah.
Population-wise. Yeah.
Yeah.
But it's like, it's nowhere, but it's… you can get to everywhere. So that's kind of what it was.
Cool.
Um, so as a result, I found out that I ended up doing a design for a bicycle museum.
And I made a timeline that was 27 feet long. It's still hanging up in the police.
department. They had a little space where they could hang this, and they said, we're gonna take this space and turn it into.
This used to be… the building used to be the bicycle factory.
So, this was a place that in the early… 1900s was running 3 shifts.
When the country was going through the… The crash, um, the Great Depression.
They were running 24 hours a day and building housing for people, and so they could move to Shelby, Ohio.
So, what I found out is making this, um, timeline.
was that there was a period. I'm looking at my notes here.
between 1876 and 1903 in the US, so that's 27 years.
Where we made these 8 things, these 8 things appeared.
the telephone? The internal combustion engine.
The light bulb, the power plant. the electrical power plant. The modern bicycle.
the radio, the airplane. And the automobile.
And I was astonished that in this. short time period, all of these things appeared.
And what life was like before that, and what life… has been, like, since that.
And, you know, we're always talking about change now, which is a, you know, related to progress, right?
And I thought… The world would be unrecognizable if all of the… But all those things that show up all of a sudden.
And what I realized is that, for the most thing.
Most part… most of the things we have now that we would call progress are just an iteration on.
what we have. Already. This, there are some new things, but most of them, I think, are just iterations, and… I have a picture of me riding a 110-year-old bicycle that I did.
a couple months ago. And it looks… Looks like a bicycle. Like, yes, you can say, oh, it's different, but you really have to look at the details to say it's different. You're gonna say, oh, it's a bicycle.
My phone is a phone. Yeah, I can carry it in my hand.
But… cell phone. Um, and… I'm wondering if, on the subject of progress, stalling.
If satisficing comes into it. satisficing is that term where.
you're reaching… you reach an adequate result rather than an ideal one.
And then you just accept it and move on.
And I would make the argument that. That's what we do.
For things that, you know, ideal is a… Or, I mean, I'm sorry, adequate is kind of a broad thing, and… Maybe some of these things that are… broken are also… In some perspectives, adequate.
were adequate enough. that they just kind of keep… keep going, because… Yeah, we can iterate on them, but… they're… they're fine. They somehow satisfy. Good enough, yes.
Mm-hmm.
Exactly. Um… Which I find to be a healthy mindset.
For many things, but it also can be a stagnating one.
for other things. So, that's my thought.
Thank you, Scott. Uh, you've provoked a whole bunch of interesting things happening in the chat as well.
Uh, which is great. Doug, please.
Yeah, I… Scott, I love that. And… and… Um, I wonder whether… Um.
one man's progress is another man's destruction. That, um, it's actually in the… failure… break down… Um, no longer fit for purpose or use.
of major societal and cultural features and institutions. that progress lies.
that in their inability to meet needs and their inability to.
actually serve and support. Manifest experiential progress.
in quality of people's lives, in emotional experience of their living them.
Um, that, uh… out of… out of those breakdowns and out of that.
system collapse. sprouts what's needed and what's new.
that constitutes progress.
Thanks, John.
And I'm complete with that.
I think that the whole, um…
whole question about who's… who sets…
Who delivers our visions of the future is super interesting in sci-fi, we've had… in the chat, we've had a lot of conversation about sci-fi authors and sci-fi visions.
Victoria mentioned Ted Chang, who has really interesting opinions on this.
There are many others. Mike mentioned David Brin.
that would make it its own good topic, which would be, like, a sharing of who our favorite science fiction
vision writers are. Unfortunately, too many science fiction writers are writing dystopian futures.
And not enough for writing more utopian futures. I wish I'd read more Ursula Le Guin.
Uh, because he was very much describing worlds in which gender happens differently, and other kinds of things happen, and she was really trying to explore, I think, more positive futures, so…
That would be an interesting…
path to follow.
the dystopian is shifting?
That trend is changing. That trend is changing, and uh… Oh, yeah, yeah, I mean, just the last 10 years, that… I mean, for a while there, that's all you got.
But, uh, no, that is… there's a concerted effort, and um… there's clearly a market.
for envisioning better worlds, and we could… I mean, I know David Bryn very well, I'm sure you do.
Yeah.
Uh, there's also the UC San. Center that, uh.
Werner Vinji?
Yep.
Um, has done some… Yep. Well, no, no, um, he was involved in it, but there's a clarion writers workshop.
And, um, some of the people there. are also helping influence this.
Um, cool. LaMarsha…
I'd love to have a topic on this, because I think how literature impacts our vision of the future is very important.
That sounds great. Good idea, thank you.
Uh, Dave?
what, I would just tossing in the, um… I stuck in a few links to some of the Tyler Cohen stuff from a year or so ago, where they're talking about kind of a science of progress, and so they're, you know,
There seems to be… it bubbled up a little while back, but uh… I was struck… I've been struck a couple of times by, like, how recent some of these ideas are that we have a humanity has an objective of progress.
And the notion that we can contribute to progress, and so I kind of accidentally stumbled across this field of miliorism, which
You know, I guess I've probably read a little bit of James and stuff, but it's from, like, the late 1800s, where the notion… Western philosophy was grappling with whether humanity was supposed to help improve the world or something.
You know? And it's like, 550 years, give or take, kind of, you know? And so before we had this notion of progress,
I think it was, like, hey, life's good, we're living a life, you know? Look, life!
And that would be a very different, you know, kind of mandate than, you know, like a striving towards something undetermined, so…
I just thought it was funny that, you know, I feel like we very much internalized the notion that we were supposed to create progress.
But, you know, what if you didn't?
Which is parallel to the sort of growth mandate that capitalism puts us under, which is everything must grow and get bigger,
And, you know, Megacor… everybody aspires to be the next Facebook, or…
or what have you, you know, or NVIDIA these days, I guess.
Well, and that's part of what I think, you know, drives me nuts about, like, the Tyler Cohn stuff is because… and it is a very mechanical in mindset, as opposed to what Pete's talking about,
And often, you know, growth means let's make it more efficient.
You know, so we're just kind of squeezed the last, you know, bit of blood out of that cow on the high-five, so…
Oh, man.
Um, Stacy, were you jumping in?
You lit up the microphone, so I was like, oh!
No, I'm sorry, did I make noise?
But let me… no worries, let me go to Alex.
Thanks, David. That was good. just to go back to what, uh.
Scott got me thinking, and then Doug as well.
But if you take as an example. And I'm gonna talk about this. I have… I'm really not intellectually invested in this or understanding, but… I will say, for example, in economics.
the way central banks run the world's economic system, or their own central bank, and then by default.
other ones, is they aim for 2% growth. Now, that is quite interesting, because.
Why not zero growth? Because then things don't get more expensive. Why not 10%? There's the kind of trying to maximize and minimize all sorts of.
competing theories, even assuming that the theories work, but that's what the thing.
So, it just strikes me that… And Scott sort of got me thinking about this, says.
there's a controlled… there's partly a mechanistic. profit-driven, controlled.
iteration. So if you've got a million. subscribers that pay for your service.
And you find a new way of doing the same thing, which means you lose half a million of them.
will you actually put that into effect? And the theory goes that, well, if it's competition, then someone else will, or whatever.
I think we're getting big enough now, where that isn't necessarily that.
playing out anymore, it's sort of…
there's a lot more directive, and I think other people have mentioned that, there's a lot more directive.
control over how we progress. than there was… there was ever before. Who was there that said that in China they do it one way, and here we do it by lawyers, or whatever? The West do it by lawyers?
Yep.
Yeah, that was… that was… I was quoting this new book called Breakneck.
I think it was, um, Mike. Yeah.
Yeah, so… so I do think it's a feature now of the system.
But it's… I can't blame anyone or point to anyone. I say.
this system has iterated to be a controlled growth system.
Rather than, uh, whoever, you know. suddenly everybody's… as much food as they want, as much whatever as they want. I don't think the system would allow that.
In today's rural societal, economic, and everything rules. But I'm way beyond my expertise now, so… that's my gut feel.
Thank you for swimming out into the deeper waters.
And it's interesting that we've spent very little, not zero, but very little time talking about social progress.
And, uh, things like gay marriage, and the things that there's major backlash against right now.
for me, you know,
a better… a better world among humans is definitely a kind of progress I would rather have.
than faster flights.
For sure. Now, greener energy that doesn't destroy the planet, I'm on… I'm on board that train, too.
to mix metaphors, maybe. Uh, but… but…
how we can't manage to get rid of wars, how we manage to still otherize people and successfully
pump the public into a frenzy.
about those other people, and then run the table on policies.
that aren't friendly to humans, I… I don't… I don't think that's progress at all. I think we're moving…
moving backwards pretty quickly right now on those things, and I would love to know…
what progress looks like there. Gil.
Well, it just complicated things for me, Jerry, thank you.
Oh, excellent. That's my job.
Yeah, um, well, so there's several things here, but pro- uh…
Yep.
So, I agree with you about things like gay marriage, but other people don't. So is that progress or not that's very subjective, subject to the culture and subcultures and so… and belief systems that you live in. So there's that level of things. There's not, you know…
Um, are we looking for universal definitions of progress, or progress as we and our cohort see it? That's sort of one.
Um…
Um, on wars, um…
Well, on the one hand, there hasn't been a major war in Europe for…
what, 70 years, until recently.
After, you know, with… in Europe, with a history of hundreds upon hundreds upon hundreds of years.
of warfare.
It's… if you look back on Europe's history with wars, it's just nasty.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
There's the Hundred Years' War, the Thirty Years' War, the Six Years' War, the… and everybody's going after everybody
So often, it's crazy.
Well, that's my point, and so that was crazy, and then post-World War II, there was 70-some-odd years of no war in Europe.
Until Putin and his gang, you know, started to keep…
kick shit up. So there, you know, so there's that.
Let's have a problem. Tim Urban.
Um, huh?
Victoria, as Mike was making some noise, I just muted her.
I'm sorry, uh, you know…
So, there's a question in that of what is the trajectory or timeframe that we're looking at? And, you know, and the historical cycles and the long trends.
Yep.
Uh, and, um, you know, we tend to pay attention to our own lifetimes here.
Um, it's… it's particularly disturbing now, because my lifetime has been mostly, until recently, a history of what I would consider progress.
Social progress. Um…
But, you know, clearly backsliding now. So there's that whole dimension, but I wanted to respond to Alex about growth.
or to whoever about growth.
Um, because clearly, you know, we now live in a system that privileges growth.
You know, if I'm a corporation, my profits grew, you know, my revenues grew 5% last year, and somebody else grew 5.2% last year, I'm in the shithouse.
So there's that game.
On the other hand, degrowth denies the biological reality of every organism is designed to feed and reproduce and propagate, so there's a natural growth in living systems, but it's constrained.
by resources, competition, and so forth. It's not infinite.
Living systems have a quality called satiation, which human capitalist economic systems seem not to.
Um, you know, a lion goes out to hunt and brings down a wildebeest and drags it back to the pride, and everybody eats, and what do they do next? They don't go out and get another one, they go to sleep.
Because they've eaten enough.
And we don't have enough here.
Um, but, you know, so the notion of…
I know David, was it you who said that the progress is this relatively recent or specialized concept. Progress was not always a drive in human history.
There was care, and there was a growth of a certain kind within resource constraints, but progress as a goal.
maybe wasn't there.
Um, and so that comes, you know, does that come in with capitalism? Does that come in with technology? Does that come in with certain religions?
Um, um, the notion of betterment in the context of care, you know, I'm going to build a better house, take better care of my family.
There's that. There's progress as accumulation of wealth and power, which maybe is a different thing.
And I don't know where else to go with that, but there's a whole territory to explore there.
And takes it back… takes me back… takes me back to Victoria on my question at the top of the call, which is,
What do we mean by this, anyway?
Love that.
And that conversation about what do we mean by this and why,
is, I think, a more illuminating and provocative question than trying to
determine… put a score on whether there's been a progress or not, because it reveals what we are each caring about.
I'm complete.
Thanks. So what do we care about?
What does matter?
Well, I… I don't know why this pops into my head, but sometimes when I'm…
Wanting to feel grateful. I realized that I… Being naked in a jungle?
I would probably be worse off. just maybe not for the next 15 minutes.
But for the next year. If I survived.
And… So, what is progress? Is it… How many people are… not… naked in a jungle?
I don't know if that is an adequate definition, but I think it's the start.
Of a definition, perhaps, that… There are so many things that we have that are… go back 200 years, did not have.
Go back 500 years, did not have. And hopefully… We find ourselves… Not reversing that.
And finding that our… Offspring are worse off and closer to the jungle.
That's an unformed thought, but I'm…
there's a… Gil, go ahead.
I just wanted to say what I put in the chat, Scott. What's wrong with Naked in the Jungle?
Naked in the Jungle has worked very well for lots of humans for a very, very long time.
Sure has, and none of us would be alive at this age.
Actually, not quite.
Probably.
Mmm, not clear from the archaeological evidence, not clear.
It's… it's unclear. I would say unclear is not a rousing… argument for, let's all… Go back to the jungle.
Yeah.
No, no, no, I'm not saying let's all go back to the jungle, I'm saying that the common meme of…
people naked in the jungle as an indication of a bygone age that was much more terrible than that, as we don't know that.
That's the, you know, that's the argument that Wengro and Graber wade into early in Dawn of Everything about these two visions of human society.
Okay, fair enough. And…
And that's one of them.
And if we don't know that it's… and we don't… if we don't know that it's worse, we also don't know it was better.
Yeah. Yeah.
So really, they don't know. I think.
I think that archaeological. data is becoming more and more clear, and the… percentage of… males of breeding age.
who died of violent means. In almost every ancient society.
wasn't, you know, 40% greater, it was 400% greater, or 1000% greater. I put a note in here.
Uh, on that. Clearly, when things are more disrupted, either because.
You now have hunter-gatherers at war with the agricultural societies.
Which is about 8,000 years ago, then you had an explosion of violence.
But the data I've seen is pretty concrete. And…
Mike Graeber and Wengro argue that those phenomena were highly localized and variable, depending on the society and culture.
Not on… not on the era.
Oh, as they say, I mean, the data shows that when there is disruption, whether climatic or.
changes in the organization of society. much more violence, but… there's no evidence for a golden age where everybody holds hands and gets along, and my tribe of 300 people don't interact with your tribe, and we all are just very happy.
No, no, no, and that's not what they're saying. They're saying that you will find situations where in the same region, you'll find some tribes that are peaceful and some tribes that are warlike, and not interacting with each other. I mean, I don't know the details of this.
But part of their argument is a much more variable tapestry of human history than what we tend to assume.
And that it's not like it evolves in a unified way over time, but it's very noisy.
Oh, yeah. I mean, that's…
I'm going to… I'm…
Yeah.
We are agree… we are agreeing vehemently. You do the average.
Yeah. No, and I'm saying let's not do the average, let's look at the variation, because their argument, I think, is that if there's that variation,
Then there's the possibility of different phenomena arising more or less, and what are the circumstances for that, and how do you nurture that?
I'm going to… I'm going to…
Violently.
I'm going to thank Alex for…
Well, again, I think we're agreeing… we're agreeing… I hope it's not violent.
Alright, guys.
Yeah, we'll stop.
I'm gonna thank Alex for his patience, and go back to, um…
the normal order of things.
Stacy, do you want to contribute to that? Because I'm just going to move it slightly.
just one statement, and it's just to be provocative.
I just want to point out that. this idea about, like, life.
And living is sort of cultural in nature. There are some.
I know it's weird, but I actually have met people.
that when their loved ones pass. They don't even grieve the way we do, because.
their idea of death is very different. So, I just want to point that out, because we all seem to think, like, you know, living in.
at all costs, like, that is the be-all and end-all.
But if you really believe that this is just one page in the book, and you're going on to the next page.
Yeah.
The thinking shifts. I just wanted to… throw that out there.
Yeah, thank you. It's all our frame of reference. Back to Alex.
Awesome. That was good. Um… that frame, what you just discussed, and it's a great discussion, right?
is historical progress. So we're comparing with times past.
But we're in the now, and we're… One way of thinking, one aspect of this question is.
do I feel like there's progress? I'm in the moment.
Therefore, my feeling of progress might not be as… I might not feel as much progress.
Maybe progress is happening. If we stand back and… well, maybe in 20 years, when we look back, we'll say, oh, that happened, that happened, that's progress.
But right now, we're living in it, and… We naturally don't feel.
or we demand more. I want flying cars. You know, I want a flying car out there.
Sorry, you know, I'd just love to have one.
Well, the hell of it. Um, and I want suddenly to, I don't know.
world's greatest battery to be invented. You know, I want this progress. I want cancer to be cured. Boom, just like that.
But it takes time. So, historical is one aspect, but what you feel is another aspect, and.
You're too close to the leading edge to feel it, perhaps.
And if someone comes up and says, Alex, you're wrong, and I'm feeling it, that's fine.
Somebody should do that just to do it, I mean, really.
I'm okay with that.
Kidding.
So, do we want to change our notions of progress? Are we…
Is progress overheated? Doug?
So, so, yeah. I would, um… offer, um… progress as… Um, an evolutionary maturation of our species such that.
Um. we managed to remember, reconnect with… the larger whole and the more transcendent idea of beyond my survival and self-interest.
what's in service to the whole. And, um… that on a… I don't know, vitality.
in alignment with natural law, in alignment with biome, in alignment with.
what's in service to life, what's in service to survival?
Um, that it's all of us or none of us.
would be progress. And I… and I actually… Um… just to sort of double down on that… Um, would… you know, suggest that.
Um. That is an emergent… It's… it's been an emergent phenomenon at different periods of.
transformation, transition, disruption. those ideas percolate through.
And they tend to be, you know. Uh, delivered by a persona.
And they tend to generate global ripples and influences and effects.
Um, and I think part of… Um, part of what might be missing today from.
the next, sort of. guiding light and or pointer indicator toward.
transitioning out of the dystopic… chaos that we're in in the moment.
Um, is that right now, that global persona is missing.
Like, I don't know that we have a bunch of those.
Um, but they tend to come out of these periods.
Mm-hmm.
So we're in a modern axial age kind of thing?
Like, they emerge… they percolate out of the… Um, and then… Yeah, and… the messengers, or the channelers, or the bearers of light, um.
you know, uh… I think we'll… we'll surface and appear, and right now we're in this period of… the absence of, and for lack thereof, everybody's, like, in chaos.
Victoria, if you want to jump in, you're saying something along these lines…
In the chat.
I'm curious what your thoughts are.
Victoria, did you hear me?
None of… no, no, no, she's unmuting.
Yeah, but you… she's muted. Do you have to unmute her, since you are the one…
Yeah, yeah, okay. No. Um, I said that.
progress for the sake of progress seems like… a vain goal, or a stupid goal, because… you need to know what you are… progressing toward.
And then Jerry asked. If, uh, progress was our new god, and I said, no, progress is the gut.
that made the illustration. the Enlightenment. Sorry.
Enlightenment. Now. We are a very, uh… barriers people, we are not homogeneous. You Americans think one way, and… and I say you Americans because I see you from Europe.
But you think different from your neighbor, and… So, some are thinking that.
the Church of the Flying Spaghetti saucer, and the others are thinking about economic, uh… sharks, and the others are thinking, going to meditate and feel… So, it's to… their priorities, we are not, uh, Borgs. I don't know if you remember Star Trek and the Borgs?
Those were the bodies. who were… they integrated everything, but they were, like.
a single organism. they didn't have individualism.
We… we do. We need to find a balance between the individual, the individual, and the society.
But we have individualism. We are not orgs.
And is there a… is there a religion that does that? I mean, FSM, the Flying Spaghetti Monster, is impost…
It's also known as Pastafarianism, which I… a term I adore.
is posed as a fun religion, as a tongue-in-cheek religion, and I own the domain fubarism.com, which is exactly inspired by
The Flying Spaghetti Monster and things like that, but it's meant to be a serious question if you got to invent your own religion,
What would you put in it?
Oh, nice!
I belong to the Judaism, uh… This is the youth, and this is the church of the Judaism. Take it easy.
Awesome!
Who knew that the… who knew that the big Lebowski was gonna make it into this call?
There are…
Um, Pete, please.
Um, I think I wanted to pick up, kind of,
where Doug, uh…
Doug B. was. Um…
And it made me think, uh, I like what you said, Doug.
And I wanted to…
play contrarian for a sec, not because I think it's a good thing, but because we live with…
this contrarian thing.
We have demonstrably billionaires whose idea… one billionaire's idea of progress is, uh, life…
sentience will become multi-planetary.
Um, and that's pretty much the only thing he cares about, really. I mean, he cares about lots of chaos and fun and hooliganism.
Um, but he's been steady on his goal of, uh, life must become
multi-planetary, you know, down the torpedoes, uh, I don't care who dies or who hates it, or what.
We're just gonna do it. Um, we have another billionaire, uh, running the country, running the country, um, who's…
His progress for him has been
dominance, um, I can make whatever decision I want, I can say whatever I want, um, I can…
deploy the U.S. military however I want. I can invade whatever I want, in-country or out of country. I can kill whoever I want.
Um, uh, I can destroy whatever building I want, and I can build whatever building I want.
That's progress for him. So…
And to get to the point where those people could make those kinds of decisions, uh, society-wide decisions,
Um, we had, you know, a few hundred, uh, you know, several centuries of moving up the ladder of…
Um, the, uh, the golden rule, the people with the most gold get to make the rules.
And, you know, so we've gotten to the point where
We have progress. A few people make, uh, dramatically…
Life-altering decisions for…
billions of people on the rest of the planet, um, and they make the… they make them more or less unilaterally.
Um…
Uh, so…
So, at least for some people, you know, we can talk about, well, I wish we could raise the tide for everybody.
For a few people,
they're thinking, what I care about is that a few people, especially me, are going to be the highest we can get. I can make the most decisions affecting the most number of people,
And have the most resources available to me. And I don't care what happens to the rest of the distribution of the population. I really don't.
So, just a reflection that, um…
the progress…
Progress is different for different people, and some of us, it's very different, um, in a way that harms everybody else.
Thank you, Pete. Mike, do you want to tell us about how progress ends, the book you just pasted the long link into the chat about?
Yeah.
I've only read the book reviews, so… and it was a biased book review.
So… but I… it's very related. There's… there have been a couple of very good, sort of.
libertarian texts on the barriers to progress, not just the one about China.
But also a couple other, uh, Reason Magazine has done a series of articles on.
on why we're getting in our way, and why we have to have social progress, as well as.
technology breakthrough. I mean, what I've heard from this talk today is reaffirming… reaffirming my statement at the top, which is, I think everybody's.
agreeing that technology continues to progress. Uh, different in different places.
And that a lot of the focus has been on social progress.
And why… and the lack of social progress is… has held back.
so many people from enjoying the benefits. I don't know if anybody saw the Washington… the Wall Street Journal today.
But I was almost moved to tears. It was an article about corruption in South Africa.
South Africa has now become the most. economically unequal country in the world.
Which is really quite a feat. And basically, the ruling party.
In the name of spreading the wealth and, you know, destroying the apartheid system.
has just… given most of the… economic activity of the country to a handful of very well-connected people in the, in the, uh… African National Committee.
I mean, it's just the ANC. It's just a corruption machine. And again.
They have progress in South Africa, they certainly have a lot more information technology and great apps, and… People are getting educated better.
But it isn't showing up in the daily lives of most of the people.
So, you know, maybe in the future we can actually ask that question, and… I'm particularly… concerned about corruption, just eating our society.
Not just in the U.S, but in South Africa. It did in Russia long ago.
And I don't know, I mean, to be positive, maybe we, you know, have a discussion about the few places where people have done something to.
To push back against corruption, or to build the guardrails.
But even in… even in the Nordic countries, which have always been very transparent and very good about fighting corruption, there is… There's a modern bandit class that seems to be showing up, and… Using the power structure to get more.
Um, it's interesting.
And I just come in on this? Sorry, Jerry.
Uh, go ahead, Alex. Yep.
When I come in on this. Mike… I am shocked to hear you say those words that you just said. They're great.
I believe them, but I considered myself to be a… A conspiracy theorist has these thoughts, honestly.
I'm shocked that you just said them. I literally have spent my life… well, not my life, the last few years, saying to people.
Wake up, you know, there's something wrong with the way… the system is.
And, uh, you know, I'll call it, uh, what is it?
currently capitalism, but, you know, it's… I'm… I'm… I'm impressed. I'm really pleased that you said that.
Yeah, well, we should, as I say, I think… How to defeat crony capitalism.
would be a very interesting topic, because it would get us focused on what's going on, and get us.
Rather than saying, how do we reinvent capitalism? just focus on that one piece of the puzzle.
Um, I love that question. I think it's a great question.
One of the reasons that I've had
a couple of side calls and a couple of topics around
governance, like what works in governance, for example, and then, uh, I have a
thing I call the next two stacks. What are our new stacks?
is that centralization tends to corrupt, absolute centralization corrupts absolutely.
to paraphrase Lord Acton.
And, you know,
in… in Russia, a peasant from the Republic of Georgia can take over the whole thing because they've designed a pyramid.
that has complete authority at the top without any checks.
And then you have, like, a whole bunch of bad stuff happens, and everywhere we see
those kinds of structures arise, they…
tend to not play out very well, so I was hunting for…
And I'm still very much hunting for.
What is the new stack of things that communities…
Large and small can choose from and adopt voluntarily.
that would do things like…
Increased prosperity, raise the sustainability of their biosphere or their watershed.
help them conquer corruption.
And defeat… expose and defeat corruption.
make them… one of the problems with
Pacifist societies living next to warring societies,
is that… is that the warring societies tend to have better weapons and less, less, uh, morality.
So they come tromping in. And this is the story of human history written
writ large, unfortunately.
is that all too often, the people who see something nice happening next door just go in and take it.
And so how do you make it very… how do you turn communities into porcupines?
or pufferfish, so that when someone tries to ingest them, they have to barf them back out.
I'm really interested in Taiwan.
How might Taiwan turn itself into a pufferfish?
Ukraine kind of is, but it's not really working. I mean, it's pretty clear to me that most Ukrainians
would absolutely hate and undermine
a regime under Putin, with every… to their dying breath, that it is…
such a poison, such a poisoned relationship that they would, you know, stand up.
But, um… but how do we do the opposite? How do we create
Or how do we compose or make available a bunch of things that actually make for a better life?
And bake into them.
some set of things, and I don't know if that means
some kind of verifiable identity on the blockchain, I don't… I don't know, that's beyond my pay grade. I don't know if that means other kinds of things, but I'm extremely interested in that.
I think that we're… and the lack
of a stack like that means that when the Arab Spring happens,
And all of North Africa basically overturns their governments,
A couple decades later, they are no better off.
Because nobody had a thing they could reach for,
that would stop the corruption from taking over, the powers that be from before, from coming back and just
adopting new clothing, but still running the country, all those kinds of things.
So, it's a little depressing to look at how human history
has failed to progress in those ways.
But I think it's very possible, but it needs to be done in some…
much more distributed, decentralized way.
I look to the, you know, Fetiverse and IndieWeb and decentralization on the net,
as maybe examples, but I'm not sure.
the crypto world doesn't feel to me like the answer. So for me, a part of the betterverse
All right.
Did you?
involves… evolving these kinds of stacks and having serious conversations to make these things better and better over time.
Sorry, Mike, go ahead.
Because of this discussion, I just discovered that there is a museum of political corruption.
Oh, nice!
Yeah, I don't know if it's real, I don't know if it's a physical place, it could just be a, um… A virtual museum.
But they do have halls of shame and halls of honor.
That is great, thank you.
Pretty cool. I put the link.
You're not, uh, without… without any actual proof, because… but… my uncle's passed along.
like, 50 years ago, when we used to talk politics and corruption, because I was in Africa, so it was all corruption, whatever.
I love that. Um, he used to say, but Alex, you have to grow your thinking.
He said, the difference between Africa and we used to live in Greece, and here is.
Corruption happens here. It's just more sophisticated. And as you go, say, to the British, they're even more sophisticated.
You don't see it, but corruption is a endemic across all societies.
So I wonder… I wonder how people feel about that.
Because that's my feeling, is there's a lot of corruption everywhere, it's just… transparent here, not so trans… you know, a bit obtuse or opaque over there.
It all depends on how much shame there is.
And I know one reason Nigeria has been. a epicenter for online scamming.
is because… when it first started happening.
there was a celebration of these scams. The scammers were almost national heroes.
one of the first things that happened in this regard wasn't on the internet, because the internet wasn't really there.
there were some guys sending faxes. to the World Bank.
And they were… they were… they were offering these special deals. Oh my god, I just need a million dollars, and then we can unlock all this money, and we can give you the finder's fee, and… It was exactly the same thing that's going on.
25, 30 years later. But there was a sense of, you know, the… the Robin Hood. You know, let's take money from these rich countries and, you know, we'll spend it here.
And that's why there's 100,000 people in Nigeria. in the online scamming business.
I think it's a little bit like, uh, the narcotraficantes in Mexico, because there are narco ridas, or something like that?
There's basically a genre of Norteno music that celebrates
that celebrates the Nautical Cartels, because they are an economic success of some sort.
Can I… sorry.
Bring money back into the community. I mean, it's… there are indirect benefits to the… Average person in the street.
Yeah.
If they're not caught in the middle of the crossfire.
Can I ask this question? Because we shouldn't discuss this, because it's a different topic, but… On the issue of Nigeria being.
scam capital for that reason, which is good. In the 90s, I remember.
Canada was also. a big source of scamming schemes to do with shares.
owning shares and whatever. And I don't know if that's… but the mechanics must be totally different there.
And why Canada? And since then, they actually… trying to look at, you know, get rid of it or whatever.
So I don't know if there's any… anything more in Canada versus anywhere else in the world.
But it just fascinates me that. it hopped across.
Well, one reason, and I'm sorry, Doug, it's your turn, but one… The reason that Canada and the Caribbean.
Oh, sorry, Doug, I didn't see it, sir.
our hotbeds of phone scams. is that they share the same… country code with us.
So they're also, you know, country code 1. And so, these little countries, little islands, look like a local call.
So we have the North American Numbering Plan to blame for this.
Good lord!
from another American. It's… I'm not making this up. This is… this is… Yeah.
You sound like Dave Berry. I am not making this up.
Love Dave Berry.
I am not making that… this is real, he… he… he…
made a lot of headway on humor from real life.
Uh, Doug, please.
I, um… What came up for me, um… A colleague of mine.
had a lot of contact with the Kogis. Which is an Indigenous tribe, and they… They have gone on these missions to Europe and around the world to raise money to buy their land back, basically.
their ecosystem and regional. you know, uh… territory. And so they go on these trips to raise money, basically.
And… Um, over the course of the trips, and there are these mamins, there were this sort of, um.
the leaders of the tribe and direct connect to source, and… And they sort of channel.
you know, what's needed and what's next, and decision-making and all the rest.
And over the course of several trips, you know, one of the Mamans was sort of.
Corrupted. You know, exposed to Western conveniences and Western this, and Western that, and… You know, they had to sort of pull him out.
of the travel core. Uh, to, you know, re… reintegrate him back into the tribal… um, you know.
Gestalt. And… you know, so the… so the question… the question for me is.
you know, what is that pull? about.
you know, what is… what is the… literal corruption on a sole basis, on a values basis, on an identity basis.
Um, because… Corrupting is the verb.
And what's being corrupted when people become corrupt? you know, what in their makeup, what in their identity, what in their awareness or consciousness?
is either turned off or is neutralized, or is negated, or is… abandoned or stunted, or missing.
Uh, in terms of an individual's makeup. Um, that renders them corruptible.
And the question… and sort of the flip side question, which is.
Um, what strengthens, you know. cultural and societal.
alignment on our values and… And, uh, and relational level.
that renders a culture or a society. Um, somewhat more Teflon or immune.
to influences that corrupt the fabric that binds. So, with that, I'm complete.
Thanks, Doug. It feels like you've just described half of Western literature.
I'm like, oh man, so many good plots came out of what you just said.
Jerry, could I jump in? Because we've got to leave for a doctor's appointment.
Just please, the man in the hat.
I just want to add it.
Yeah, just a quick comment before Ken shows up with a poem. Um, what…
I don't know that he is, but…
I don't know either, but it's a ritual thing. What Doug said reminds me of Doris Lessing's notion of the substance of weed feeling.
that she talked about in the remarkable Shikasta trilogy.
And that appears or breaks in society. Is that, you know, that notion of a kind of mutual care, responsibility, and so forth. That's an anti-corruption.
component. And last, on the matter of corruption, I'm… I'm a biomimicist. I tend to look at the 3.8 billion years of open source R&D that Earth's living systems have generated.
Um, that's available for us for free.
to draw from if we choose to.
Uh, but if I look at those systems, I see that parasitism and predation
are part of the game.
And so what we've been calling corruption is our… is the name that we are giving to that phenomenon.
And maybe that phenomenon is natural and inevitable.
And then what? Or maybe it's something that is natural and inevitable, like in living systems, is constrained and limited, or self-limiting.
parasites can't destroy the host, because they die if they do.
Uh, part of the problem with our modern systems is that we don't have the
I don't even know what the word for it. We don't have the kind of coupling between systems, the appropriate feedback loops, and so forth, that provide the damping.
and constraint of these inevitable phenomena. So they go haywired.
And that's where we are now, and I… Doug… Doug, I like your phrase, but I can't say I'm complete, because I'm not, but there you are. I'm done speaking, at least.
We could end with, and I'm incomplete.
And thank you, everybody. We have to leave. I'll catch you on the recording. Bye-bye.
Thanks. Thanks, Gil.
Take care.
And we only have a few minutes left in this particular call.
Anybody want to summarize, uh…
plot a path forward, uh…
critique, uh, whatever you'd like.
For what it's worth, I… go toe-to-toe with Yale from time to time.
But I do definitely agree with him on this, and it's something I've been trying to.
wrestle with is the idea of. seeing the system.
accepting the system. And then… Deciding what you want to do, but understanding that.
As he said, some of these things just… they exist.
And our hubris that we could… somehow create a system of 8 billion where it doesn't… exist seems… like a… Perhaps that the wrong direction.
How do we… how do we dance with it?
instead of damning it. You know, how do you surf on the wave instead of.
trying to have a still pond. I don't know, that's all just… spontaneous out of my brain there, so… I'm not sure where that's going, but I think that there's something important.
about saying, we need to have a world where these things don't exist.
Versus, we need to live in a world where these things do exist.
as long as we're doing that dance to go to something else skill set in the chat.
He made the distinction between corruption and scamming, which I think is an important one.
Because corruption is something done by the powerful, we're scamming. There is a lack of power, which is why they have to scam in the first place.
I mean, I… I think that there's a difference there.
And if you're gonna look at the whole dance.
I think you have to look at that piece, too.
That's a really interesting distinction.
often a scam, though, leads to power and money that then goes back into corruption, so there's…
It's a little infinite loop, yeah. And then you do… and then you do jail time, lose your money, and you have to go back to scamming, I mean…
But it's fluid.
It's like a little infinite cycle.
Whatever it is, it's fluid, and so…
It's… the point's… the point is exactly right, but there's no way to separate the two.
It's a…
I don't know… what I'm hearing from Stacy, though, Stacy, clarification. Are you seeing a… are you… We're referencing a sense of scale in that.
To me, corruption feels… larger and more coordinated and scamming feels more…
I'm just saying… I'm not even… I'm not even answering the question. I'm just raising the question.
And just bringing it out, just saying. Let's look at the whole thing.
you know. I'm just asking the question.
The root is often the same, the fact that people.
have no shame. And I mentioned the Nigerian case, the scamming happened because.
well, I think they… understood the idea of shame, and there were a lot of religious people who thought that that was stealing.
There was also a sense of… hey, we're taking money that was stolen from us.
Right, and I'm also…
So… so there. And I do worry that we have… I mean, that would be a great question, too. You know, have we reached the end of shame?
And with certain members of the political class here in Washington, starting with.
Mike Johnson and J.D. Vance. They clearly have no shame.
Actually, shamelessness is a positive strategy of the far right.
It's a very intentional thing.
It's a really intentional thing, and it's working like crazy.
And this is a tangent, but it worries me no end, because nonviolent social action
Absolutely depends on shame.
Yep. And it's George…
Absolutely depends on shame. You're counting on… you're counting on people seeing how crappy those people's behavior is and being ashamed and changing their minds, and…
Voting differently, or overthrowing the government, or whatever. But if we're entering the post-shame era,
I'm afraid a lot of our assumptions about what might work and how to do things
might just break, might not work at all, and that's got me pretty scared.
I marched in the No Kings March here in Washington, and a lot of the posters.
Yeah, no.
assumed that shame was still a powerful force. But you're right. If George Santos.
can have… be given leniency. And all these Republicans are like, oh yeah, right, you're right.
That means shame is gone. I mean, this guy, I mean, he stole from tens of thousands of… Good, loyal Republicans.
as Trump has over and over again.
Go ahead, Stacy.
Pete, can I just say one thing? Just one thing really quickly. Even when you say something like, shame is gone, I just want to remind you, yes, shame is gone in that way, but now.
shame about their sexuality. They have that. So when we make these blanket statements, I just want us to remember that.
Yes, if we're looking at one thing, it's true, but we can look at something else, and it's not true.
And that's something that we humans seem to do a lot. We make this blanket statement.
And we don't recognize that if we flip it around.
Love that. Thank you, Stacey.
It's absolutely a wrong statement.
Pete?
Um, it's, uh, it's terrible that we've lost the sense of shame in politics. It's really…
striking and horrifying. Um, and I… on corruption, I…
I… that's a really interesting topic, and I…
want to make sure that we…
don't… don't end up aiming for zero corruption. I think, um, in…
in any complicated system, there's going to be some
some grafting corruption, and if it's done right, it actually kind of lubricates the whole system and keeps it going. Um, it's when…
It's when the, uh, corrupted folks
don't have a sense of shame or proportion, or balance, or something like that.
that it… it grows and turns into something malevolent.
It's kind of like, it reminds me of living in a world with a lot of…
viruses and bacterias and stuff like that, you know, if everything is kind of like…
homeostatic, then, you know, it's like, yeah, your body kind of deals with it. It's actually good
To have a little bit of low-level irritation going on.
Um, but when it gets out of control, you know, when some kind of balance goes off, then it's bad.
Um, the reason I raised my hand was because, Jerry, when you said it
you know, is there anything we want to wrap up with? Um, I… the thing my… one of my
top carry takeaways from this was, um, Mike said something like, uh,
how to defeat crony capitalism would be a great topic, and I want to second that. That's a…
That seems like it kind of, like, narrows down and fits a lot of stuff. So, I wanna…
Raise my hand for that.
Love that. And, uh, next Thursday is not the first of the month yet.
So, I think we've found our topic for the 30th.
Thank you for that.
Yes, that or… that or a benediction.
Can I offer a slight tweak? Instead of… in… Instead of defeating crony capitalism, how about rendering it obsolete?
Even better. Even better.
Sounds great.
I'm changing the wording in my notes.
This has been really fun. Thank you for, um…
Thank you for joining, and as usual, Victoria, thank you for joining us.
You're very happy you're here.
We are… we are really glad to have you here, and…
The duking it out in the… everywhere in the chat, in the conversation worked wonderfully, so thank you.
Anyone else with a closing thought?
We don't have Ken for a while, uh…
With a poem, sadly. So, Victoria Ken Homer has been a long-standing member of this group, and he's sort of decided to step out of things for a
for a bit. He's also moving.
to Spain, I think. I think he and his wife are moving to Valencia.
And he had this… he is, uh…
Wanted to be an actor when he was young, so he has a great presence and speaking voice, and also loves poetry, so he would find poems and read them to us at the end of…
a lot of OGM calls, so if you've watched the recordings, you'll see poems at the end. If you go through my notes in the brain, you'll find for every OGM call, I'll link up to the poem that
Ken read to us.
And it's been a really lovely custom. If anybody else feels like picking up that, uh…
that, uh… I was gonna say duty, it's not a duty, it's, uh…
It's a mission, it's a…
Honor.
Something else. Honor.
We would be grateful. And in some cases, he would read us his original poetry, which was…
Time as he would write his own poems.
Stellar. Just stellar.
So, thank you all, and we'll see you next week when we'll talk about how to deflate, diffuse, defeat, not defeat, disarm crony capitalism.
Absolutely, that's it. That's in my notes.
I forgot the word. Thanks.
it obsolete.